Our committee members who don't know about the CTU, we represent
32 affiliated unions across almost every
sector of the New Zealand economy.
340,000 union members are affiliated through their unions,
making us probably the largest democratic organization in New Zealand,
if not one of the largest. We do want to start by
acknowledging Te Tiriti o Waitangi as the founding document of
Aotearoa, and we do our work through Te Rūnanga
Ó Ngā Kaimahi Māori, which is the Māori arm of Te Kāwai Kaimahi,
and they represent around 60,000 Māori workers.
I want to begin by saying that the CTU supports the submissions
of our affiliated trade unions. Those submissions
that you've been hearing already and the ones to come will provide you as a select
committee with critical insight into how the proposed
changes to our health and safety legislation will
significantly and negatively impact on workers
and their whānau. The CTU does not support this
bill progressing, and we ask that you do not
move it into the second reading.
We want to take that you've read the submission and not go
into the substantive detail,
but we do want to say that that substantive detail, the substantive
concerns we have raised in our written submission,
are not only in line with other worker submissions, but they
are broadly in line with many industry associations'
concerns and the concerns of professionals in the health and safety
space and of academics who work in this area.
So there seems now to be quite a united voice
coming to this committee and saying that these changes are neither
appropriate
nor needed, and that they will in fact be dangerous for
workers.
Trade unions act daily in the space of health and safety in trying to
protect the safety of workers, and we advocate
strongly to make sure that we have safe practice at
work.
Our work as a council of trade unions includes advocating both nationally
and internationally to ensure that the collective voice of working New
Zealanders is heard on the matters of health and safety, both
daily in their workplaces, but in forums like this,
in select committees and international forums.
And I do want to point out that we don't just speak for union members, that
actually the work we do supports all working people, whether in
union or not.
This bill has to be seen in the context of a range of recent
legislative changes that are being pushed through by this government,
which are driven not by good evidence, not by good
information, but in fact are just being driven by
ideology. The bill sits in the context of a long rat
sheet of anti-worker legislation from the past few
months and longer, including the
reintroduction of 90-day trials and the changes to
the Employment Relations Amendment Act, which will substantially, for
most workers, abolish their remedies when they are
unjustifiably dismissed, and also that
Employment Relations Act will allow employers to contract
out of their employment,
or contract out employment rights, I should say.
Then there is the scrapping of the fair pay agreements and pay equity
claims affecting hundreds and thousands of workers who really
need a lift in their incomes. These changes
represent significant, significant backward
steps with regard work rights, and they undermine
the system that oversees and protects the rights of workers.
And this bill currently before you as a select committee should be
viewed in relation to all those other law changes as it
and the other law changes are making workers more vulnerable
and increasing insecurity in our workplaces.
And when that comes to the health and safety of workers, we already
have a really terrible, terrible record as a country.
And I'm sure you know these figures, but in honor of those workers who have lost
their lives at work, I want to repeat that about 18 workers a week are
killed because of work. And
every 15 minutes, a worker suffers an injury that
requires more than a week off work.
And every year we lose nearly 900 New Zealanders from work-related
health illnesses and injuries. So our record
is appalling. And this reform, in fact,
winds back the last significant reform
and the enacting of the Health and Safety at Work Act,
and we need to remember the history of why we have the Health and Safety at
Work Act, and that is the terrible disaster at Pike River,
where 29 workers were killed because of
serious health and safety failures.
We all agreed at that time New Zealand had to do something about this,
had to make sure we never saw another Pike River
again, and we strengthened our health and
safety legislation. We are deeply concerned that
Parliament, and in particular this government, has already
forgotten the lessons we learned from Pike River.
So we have been vocal for a long time, the union movement and the
Council of Trade Unions, about improving support for health and safety at
work, to give workers strong rights to be healthy and
safe and to have a voice in workplace health and safety
systems. This bill takes us in absolutely the
wrong direction. The changes proposed are regressive and
actively weaken the laws and systems designed to keep workers safe
and healthy. Passing this bill into law sends a
messageTo too many people that harming
workers is now acceptable. And I'll just pass over to Corey,
who will just talk through the headlines of our submission.
Thank you, Sandra. Yeah, as Sandra mentioned, don't want to get into too much
detail, take it as read, but just to highlight some of our key concerns and
recommendations from the submission.
We do not think that the changes to the critical risk framework align with the
proportional risk-based health and safety system, and we don't think they
actually meet the stated objectives of the bill itself either.
We think the small PCBU carve-outs create an
unjustifiable two-tier health and safety system. Those should be discarded.
The health and safety of workers, that doesn't depend on the number
of people employed in a business.
We think the ACOPS safe harbor provisions will disincentivize
continuous improvement, and that will constrain regulatory enforcement in those
spaces. Those parts of the bill should not proceed.
And yeah, we think the safe harbor status
from those ACOPS changes will have serious unintended consequences and impact
on regulator activity. And just finally,
we have some serious concerns regarding these changes in terms of our
international conventions, commitments, and agreements.
We see that a lot of the regressive policy in this
bill goes back against the core conventions, the International
Labor Organization, conventions 155 and 187,
which are both core fundamental conventions at the ILO.
And there are some key
trade agreement provisions that expressly prohibit parties from weakening or
reducing the levels of protection under labor laws, and we see that this bill
is doing that on the basis of trying to cut compliance
costs and business activity.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
We don't appear to have any questions, but that is not a reflection of your
submission at all. It's very, very detailed, and in fact, probably why we have
none. So thank you very much for your contribution to this process.
We do appreciate it.
Thank you.
Wonderful. We'll move on now to our next
submitter, Culture Shift. We have Alan Halse.
Alan, sorry if I have pronounced your surname incorrectly.
No.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning,
and that includes time for questions, and so please
use that as you wish. Over to you.
Thank you. And I'd like to
thank the committee for granting time today.
Now,
I go back
probably longer than most of the CTU members.
I was a union chairman in Auckland in
1977. So I've been around a long way, but I've gone
down a different pathway from the unions
over the last 12 years, and I work in the area
of psychosocial harm, so in the area
of workplace bullying. So, our
submissions
aren't so much about the relevance of the
Amendment Act in terms of the physical harm,
although I do agree with a lot of the comments of the Council of
Trade Unions that there is a real risk in the
workplace these days. It's greater than I've ever seen
in
my 56 years of work, and I've worked
both in physical work and
basically office-based.
So we see this
Amendment Bill as an opportunity to extend
the physical harm
to include bullying as a health and safety concern.
And we believe in doing so, that that would signal that
government acknowledges the problem of bullying and takes it
seriously. We're second worst in the developed world
for workplace bullying,
and recent figures from Human Rights
Commission
talk about
bullying costing 1.34 billion
annually,
and they talk about
figures as high as 39% of people being
bullied.
So when the Health and Safety at Work Act
was passed, and it was passed on the 4th of April
2016, the big difference was they
altered in the act the definition of health.
So the definition of health now means
physical and mental health. Now,
when that happened, there was
expectations that WorkSafe in particular
would start dealing with mental health issues.
So every section of the act that deals
with physical health also
deals with mental health. Now, at the time it was
implemented, and on the same day, 4th of April
2016,
prominent constitutional lawyer May Chen of
Chen Palmer, said in an opinion piece that was
published in The Hill the same day, that mental health in
workplace is the new frontier for health and safety.
Now, that's what
everybody expected. That's what we expected dealing in the area
of workplace bullying.
And the idea was that we look beyond
physical harm into the area where we're dealing
with
other issues that include the psychosocial risks,
that include workload, job design, and bullying.
And there was an expectation that employers would
use tools like ISO to identify
hazards and implement controls before harm
occurredAnd there was also the expectation
that employers and company leaders would act as role
models, training supervisors to recognize the
stress, burnout, and early warning signs.
Now,
utilizing structures that promoted a
positive culture, support running to work after
mental health struggles, and fostering an environment
where employees feel valuable.
Now,
laws in various jurisdictions, including New Zealand,
mandate that employers' duties include mental health and safety,
not just physical safety. Now, one of the things that
we know
from the work that we do,
that when somebody is working under mental
health pressure, and I'll give an example of
a case where somebody's working
in a physical job, say in forestry, where
they're cutting down trees and doing that kind of work.
They've worked long hours. They're under stress.
They
have been working for 10, 12 hours. They want to go home.
They say to their employer, "Look, I'm
physically exhausted. I'm mentally exhausted.
I need to leave."
They're threatened with dismissal,
and that's
bullying again. And they continue to work and
suffer an accident. So the
psychosocial harm can also influence the physical
harm.
Now,
Mai Chen highlighted
these issues, noting that mental health is as critical as
physical safety in modern workplaces.
And proactive management improves retention and
organizational performance while mitigating legal
and health risks.
Now,
I've been working in this area with my company,
Culture Shift New Zealand, for 12 years.
We've represented more than 1,400 workers, and of
those 1,400 workers, and
we know because we've surveyed them,
87%,
by the time they engage our services, are
suffering from anxiety, depression, or have PTSD.
50% of them have considered suicide,
9% have attempted suicide. So we
have dealt with about 100 workers who have
attempted suicide
because of what's occurred in their workplace.
Now, this should never happen. Now,
we
offer hope, but we've tried getting
WorkSafe New Zealand
to prosecute employers where serious
psychological harm has occurred.
We've given them cases where
we've got the evidence. We've given them cases where there's been
suicides, and we've got the suicide notes and the death
certificate. WorkSafe New Zealand, New Zealand's
health and safety regulator, has not prosecuted
a single case, not even one. So
the act itself
allows that to happen. Now, in addition
to
talking about the bullying, and the bullying is a big part of why they
attempt suicide, because they've been undermined.
The actual act of bullying is about being,
I guess, publicly humiliated,
isolated, and a whole lot of other things.
So
this is an opportunity to understand that the act
allows it to happen already. It doesn't need
significant change,
but there has to be emphasis from Parliament
to include bullying and perhaps a definition
in the act about what bullying is.
I
could talk about this topic forever.
It's my favorite topic, and it frustrates me.
But I thought I'd end there in case there are any questions
from the
subcommittee. And I once again thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you, Alan. It is very clear that you're passionate about this, so we
appreciate that. We do have a question from Dan Rosewarne, so we've got
just enough time for that.
Thank you, Chair, and thanks, Alan, for your contribution there.
One of the areas I'm concerned about in this bill is the
potential unintended impact on workplace safety culture,
particularly around the reporting of near misses, and in some
workplaces, employees who wish to raise concerns around
near misses can be the subject of workplace bullying or
harassment. Now, in my experience, near-miss reporting is one
of the most effective early warning indicators that we do have, and it
allows risks to be identified and addressed
before that actual harm occurs, and you mentioned that before.
But what constitutes a near miss is inherently subjective and heavily
influenced by that workplace culture.
And my question to you is, how
do you assess the likely impact of this bill on near-miss
reporting behaviors, and what safeguards are needed in this
bill,
or do you think that are necessary to ensure that near misses
continue to be identified and acted on
across all workplaces?
And thank you for the question, Dan.
I don't believe this amendment is going to help.
I
haven't seen anything that will help.
I'm actually currently in a mediation in Auckland, and I'm
representing somebody that's a health and safety rep
that got victimized. So when it comes to raising
concerns, in our role, we see health and
safety reps, health and safety advisors, and health
and safety managers being victimized by their
employer when they raise concerns, and that's a
real risk that I see. So there does
need to be that level of protection because people aren't
raising concerns for fear of retaliation and
victimization.
Thank you very much. That's all the time we have with you today, Alan.
So thank you for being part of this process. We do appreciate it.
Thank you. Appreciate the time. Thank you all.
Thank you. We will move on now to the New Zealand Professional
Firefighters Union. We've got Wattie Watson joining us.
Wattie, hopefully you're online,
you can hear us. Here we are.
If you could turn your camera on and your audio on.
Morena.
Morena. We have you for 10 minutes, and that does include
time for questions, and I'll leave that to you how you utilize it.
And thank you very much.
Thank you, Katie.
I'm Wattie Watson. I'm the National Secretary of the New Zealand Professional
Firefighters Union, and we represent
almost 100% of all of New Zealand's career firefighters.
We also represent almost 100% of the, uh, fire
dispatchers when you call 111 emergency and seek
fire.
And we represent
more than 85% of everyone employed by FENZ, including those working in
risk reduction in health, safety, and wellbeing.
I understand that you hopefully have had some time.
There's so many submissions. I really do feel for select committees at
times. The level of work is huge. But I just want
to start by really touching on what the supposed objectives of this
bill are, and the first one was to reduce unnecessary compliance
costs. Now, what is the cost?
What is the cost of a life? What is the cost of injury?
And what is the cost of illness, particularly when it is avoidable, or where
proper processes in the workplace would've identified those risks and
dealt with it?
And, what we often see is a complaint
about red tape where there is no actually
cost-benefit analysis done. The reality is,
employers, regardless of the economic or global
environment that we're in, even when we're in good times, employers and
businesses are obviously trying to find
savings and trying to be as profitable as they can, including
governments and public service. If we do not have
strong, robust requirements in law that are
punishable, and there are achievable
mechanisms to hold people to account, we will not have safe
workplaces. The CTU also already demonstrated this
morning how dangerous our workplaces are, and by
weakening... These laws need strengthening, not weakening.
And we will only see, increasingly
workers subjected to unsafe
workplaces and very little that they can do about it.
The trying to carve out all the small
employers is
the wording. The current wording is very, very weak and
broad.
Basically, it says where the employer expects to only have
X amount of workers with a nine months average over the year.
We've already had just an attack on what the definition of employer and
contractor is. We're yet to see the impact on the
workplaces as well. If an employer can
regulate how it records who's doing what type of
work in the workplace to avoid further
obligations in health and safety, there will be employers that
do that, and I think that we really need to think seriously
about this. The focus on critical risks,
critical risks are
probably actually sometimes the most identifiable risks, but
all risks need to be identified and then appropriately
mitigated to the level of risk. Now, for us, for our membership
in particular, for the firefighters, they work for Foreign and Emergency New
Zealand, so they don't come under
a PCBU that would necessarily be able to
avoid the requirements under this act.
However, the changes to the PCBU officers
will impact our members as well. So the weakening of the
requirements and the obligations, and quite frankly, the stick or the penalty
if they don't undertake the obligations seriously will impact on our
members. But in particular, my submission was more about
what will happen to the firefighters in particular as they respond.
And there's this kind of misunderstanding in New Zealand
that the big dangerous fires are the
big petrol chemical fires, or the hazardous substance
fires. In actual fact,
most New Zealand buildings are extremely toxic due to
the level of human-made products in construction and in
furnishings, and increasing in plastics.
But this act, what this act will do is just a snapshot.
Many of New
Zealand's-Recycling,
which are really basically hoarding of plastics, are
done in small
industry sites that are dotted around, not remote areas anymore.
They can be in quite high industry or commercial areas.
Now, on that site, there might be only one or two workers.
Trucks come in and out,
drop the stuff. There'll be a worker or two that might be working there,
but they would not be covered by this legislation.
We already have massive gaps in across
the legislation that requires people to properly
record the nature of the products or the chemicals
or the plastic, whatever it is, on their work site.
We already have huge gaps in that. We have huge gaps in requiring
people to have proper evacuation plans, to have fire safety
systems,
to have, for example, sprinkler systems, to have water available for
firefighters, to have space so a fire truck can come up and fight the fire.
This, in a combination, we're in a cycle of
removing all the necessary protections for our communities,
but also for the firefighters that are fighting those fires.
Now, to reduce stuff to critical risks and to only look at Schedule
2 is to really only not even take the tip of the
iceberg of what the risks are facing.
So we are urging this committee to
listen to all the wonderful submissions that have been held and really request
you
prevent this bill going any further.
Thank you very much, Wadih. Appreciate your submission.
We have a question from Dan Rosewarne.
Thanks for that submission. I just want to touch on an issue that's particularly
relevant for emergency services, and that's the
flow of safety-critical information from the front line.
Now, in high-risk environments, from my experience,
near-miss reporting and open communication are vital, not just for the
workforce involved, but for public safety more broadly.
However, in more hierarchical organizations, there can sometimes be a
real or perceived constraint on what frontline
personnel can actually say, particularly around where
operational, reputational, or leadership pressures are present.
And my concern is that this bill creates ambiguity
around reporting expectations, and it may further
discourage the open reporting of near misses
and emerging risks
from those on the front line. And I just wanted to know your perspective.
Do firefighters feel able to freely report near
misses and safety concerns? And how might the
changes proposed in this bill affect that?
So they do have a system called a Safe at Work,
basically app, where they can go in and report that.
But what we have seen, even under the current Health and Safety at Work Amendment
bill, Act, sorry, not the bill, is that FENZ is
increasingly moving away from the ways in which they would inquire
into those notifications. So there's policy
currently where if there's a near miss or a minor
injury even, or
a significant issue at an incident,
there would be a level one or two investigation or an
operational review. And we're finding, in the last 18
months, I'm fighting, I'm literally writing to FENZ saying, "We
must do a review." And those investigations are not about blame
on who's ever at the incident or even the systems.
It's about learning so that we make sure that we are identifying
these risks and then doing something about them.
And FENZ is increasingly making that really hard to get them across the
line. We had one recently where three people were injured at a fire
and FENZ is telling me we have not met the threshold for
what was a level two investigation.
And that's a real concern for us. And this bill
just even takes
some of the more basic access we have, where we don't have the fight
anymore, because they can say, "Look, it's not a requirement under the Act."
We are also finding that the health and safety committees aren't working.
They just fall by the by. And there's some that work, but
some that don't. And when we ask,
"Can you please make sure that there is some reporting going on?" It goes on for
months, and they say, "Oh, we've asked, but we haven't..."
Delay.
So we've got serious problems already under
this Act. We're struggling to find teeth with WorkSafe
now.
This bill will only remove the little
leverage that we have to point to a section and say, "Look, you have to do it under
this section."
Thank you very much, Wadih. We've finished with our time with you this morning, but
as I said, really appreciate your contribution to the process.
Very helpful insight. Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
All right. We will move on now to the GM Safety Forum.
We have got with us Max Riley.
There we go. I'll just unmute myself.
Yeah. Great. Thank you. And sorry, Rob, I didn't have
you on my list, but we've got Rob Mair as well.
Good morning.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that includes time for questions, and
I'll hand it over to you.
Thank you very much. So good morning to the Chair and members of the committee, and
thanks for the opportunity to appear. My name is Max Riley.
So I'm here representing the steering committee of the GMs Health and Safety
Forum. My regular role is the head of business resilience for Chorus New
Zealand.
So Rob Mair is a colleague. He's also representing the steering committee
of the GMs Forum, and he's the executive general manager for health, safety, and
wellbeing at Ports of Auckland.So, to give some context, the
GM Forum represents senior health and safety leaders from New Zealand's
businesses with complex operations, extensive
contractor and supply chain relationships, and exposure to
those critical risk and high consequence events.
To help frame up our submission, our members
make the health and safety system in New Zealand work in practice across
our businesses. We support reforms that make the system clearer and more
consistent, and that truly reduce fatalities and serious
harm.
From our business and operational point of view, the system works best
when responsibilities are clear, easy to understand and manage, and
that expectations are consistent across regulators,
businesses, clients, and subcontractors.
We want to make sure that effort is focused on the risks that can kill and
seriously injure people.
We think that unclear signals do not necessarily reduce the burden,
and that the system will operate effectively when critical risk is
well-defined and applied with consistency.
I'm going to touch a little bit on overlapping duties, and Rob will touch a little
bit further on critical risk. So, for overlapping duties,
our core message is that consistent overlapping duties are essential
for serious harm prevention in this complex work environment and
arrangement.
They're not unnecessary duplication, they're a safeguard to help
guide us through. And that creating the two-tier system
just increases red tape for small business.
Our critical risks don't change. Risk doesn't really discriminate no matter what
size business you are. So, kind of framing that up by the size of your
business doesn't matter.
And Rob, did you want to jump in there on
critical risk?
Thank you, Max. And, yeah, good morning to the members of the committee.
As Max indicated, we're supportive of the
work to reframe the focus onto critical risk.
There's a couple of points that we'd like to make
aligned to that. The first is that I think making
sure the definition of critical risk is correct
is absolutely fundamental.
One of the features of critical risks is that they can often appear
infrequently, but when they do in our workplaces,
the outcomes are very severe.
So including a likelihood definition
is problematic, and the risk there is that
legitimate critical risks would be declassified,
and therefore put workers at harm as a result of that.
The other adjacent point, I think, is around
making sure that duty holders do have
guidance available for them to understand what
that focus on critical risk looks like and feels like in
practice. We know that there's inconsistencies in approach there
across different industry sectors.
We are very supportive of the industry-led
approved codes of practice and associated guidance.
One of the things that we'd be keen the committee considers is how will
the development and production of that guidance and approved codes of
practice be resourced?
Making sure that there are funds and resources to
enable PCBUs to work on what good looks
like by that, and ensuring that it's made available
across all industry sectors is, I think, a really important enabling step.
Back to you, Max.
Yeah. Well, I think that you will have heard from a number of businesses,
but it's the opportunity to ask us some questions at this stage.
Thank you very much. I do appreciate that.
I'll just see if we have any questions from the committee.
Don't take any lack of questions as a lack of interest though, please.
We read all of these submissions, and usually when we don't have questions, it
means you've put the submission together very, very well.
So with that, I think we might let you go and give you back the rest of your time,
and we'll move on to our next submitter. So thank you very much, Max and Rob.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Appreciate it.
Wonderful. We'll move on now to the HS Education Forum.
We have Dave Moore.
Welcome, Dave.
Hi there, Katie.
Hello. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that includes time for questions,
and we'll leave it over to you now.
Thank you very much. Thank you, everybody.
I think we're going to be joined by a colleague of mine,
Mia Aluna,
from the forum as well. So we're representing a health and
safety education forum, which is facilitated
by hazards presently.
Mia is the student representative, and
I think Mia is a early career
student working full-time in the primary industry.
It's a difficult primary industry whilst trying to study and get herself
established. So we felt it'd be useful particularly having her here for
questions if people have any questions.
I'm at the other end of the career spectrum, as it were.
I worked in health and safety as an educator, applied
researcher, and a consultant for about
30 years in just about every sector, and worked for a number
of the universities, and still am.
So I have a foot in each camp in that sense.
I think the education forum
is, you'll have read from the submission, but just to quickly recap, I think the
crucial thing here is particularly following Pike River, it was
clear that across all of the professional bodies that were
involved in helping businesses-Come up with solutions.
There's complex problems require complex solutions, and so
hazards reflects that aspect of it.
The Education, Health and Safety Forum draws on those different
bodies, but also
people out in various areas of industry that can help us
with that larger question of what we need to teach to who, and what
kind of delivery is crucial for them.
Why we submitted, the core reason why we submitted is
that I feel within that forum, we've got a unique perspective on how the
mechanisms within OHS work. I mean, at a
government level and in my previous permanent role that I had, I
was a manager at WorkSafe for Health and Safety by Design, so I've got some
understanding of
the difficulties of working at a parliamentary level, making the rules,
and then understanding whether you can actually apply these or not, and the
costs associated with
enforcement. And I think because we do have that
understanding of the mechanisms, we felt it could be a useful
contribution to make to this overall discussion.
Our overall position on the bill is that we absolutely support the objectives.
I think anyone working in this
area
would be struggling to not do so. I think it's a question of how we
achieve them, and I think in my experience, I go back to the
'92 act and then obviously later on with the next act.
In both cases, I believe what was
implicit about responsibilities and how this is all going
to work
was never made explicit. Because we'd gone from a system in the '80s where
every sector had its own
framework to work to, it had its own inspectors, and so that
expertise that we're missing now, frankly,
we gave that away when we moved to the umbrella.
Which the umbrella approach had benefits, but we also gave away
that, and there was always the understanding, clearly with the second act, that we
were going to be replacing that expertise with the regulations,
the codes of practice and so forth.
So that two-tier system, which you see in most of the
professions, law, medicine, you have your first principles,
underlying first principles, which is a common language, a shared
language, and you need literacy of that language
across all the stakeholders in order to be able to achieve these
advances.
So I think in order to achieve the objectives that are set
out here, firstly, we need to be more closely defining
costs. Are we talking about
simply registered businesses, or are we looking at the society as a whole?
Because clearly, if someone's unemployable for the second half of their
working life through, say, gradual onset musculoskeletal disorders,
that individual,
their experience is costing the family and the
community because of a loss of ability to contribute, in an
unpaid way as well. And I think particularly looking at the
draft as it stands at the moment for the bill, I believe the area that we could
end up with increased cost, and unless we're very careful, is
gradual onset leading to musculoskeletal
disorders. I've done a lot of work with ACC over the years, and the
account that always causes the most problem is the ongoing.
The musculoskeletal, it just doesn't go away within a few months.
That's the part that they're always pointing us at and saying, "What can we do
about this group here?" Unfortunately, because of claim migration,
the motivations for people to simplify their claims
process by perhaps overemphasizing the
acute nature and underrepresenting the
gradual onset, that's really problematic from a research
point of view because it gives a skewed impression of actually what's going
on out in industry. And I think some of the early work that
was done to do with burden of harm by NOSAC a few years ago,
that was starting to give ourselves a sense as to what is the real
total burden of cost and who's paying it.
And I think societally, we carry a huge amount for
industries who could do more to make jobs
able to be done throughout a working life, particularly those
related to musculoskeletal disorders.
So I think the second thing that we need to achieve is a higher
level of occupational health and safety literacy, not just
across people with that in their job description, because we all have shared
responsibilities under the act, including visitors to sites,
including the general public. So I think that sense of higher
level of literacy, which I know in some countries where this is included
into school leaver education and so forth, is a really crucial
part of it.
Otherwise, again, we don't achieve that reduction in cost that we're looking for,
the overall cost. And I think
thirdly, we've need to have that sector-specific
expertise and application
reflected in the work that's done by the regulators.
So the regulations that we effectively gave away in '92,
that industry expertise and understanding, that's
the part that I think is the most crucial bit.
And while it sounds as though it's going to cost more money up front, I think in
the longer term, the savings to New Zealand as a whole are where the real
cost benefits can come. In order to achieve that, I
suppose the third thing that we'd like to encourage the committee to look hard at
is the implementation of this act.
Because at the point that it goes through, there was things said
implicitly in both the 2015 and
1992. They were there implicitly, if
people wanted to pick them up and enforce them.
They weren't explicit enough, and there wasn't the budgets for it.
That missing piece, I thinkIs something where this act
could make a hell of a difference and actually start to turn that,
particularly the ongoing burden of cost from musculoskeletal
disorders,
could turn that around.
And I think probably
I've said as much as I should to leave a bit of time for questions if anyone has
any.
Great. Yeah, look, I just had one quick question, Dave, just about
your... You just touched on it before with the implicit,
versus the explicit, and you talk a lot about the training.
Who do you see that cost falling onto?
Does that become an organizational requirement or is that a
pre-job training and industry training
requirement, do you think?
I think I see it at two different levels, Katie.
On the one hand, we've got the question of first
principles, and that training I would say that's coming more underneath education.
I would say the explicit element of it sitting in the development of the
regulations, codes of practice and so forth.
And to an extent, if you
look at it simply and say, well, those who benefit should bear the cost.
At the same time, I think, if you take more of a public health model, that
field of benefit ripples further and further, into
intergenerational benefit, in the same way as when we look at, for
example, adult literacy. Who's that benefiting?
Well, not just the person who learns to read, it's their family, it's their
children's friends, their nieces and nephews, et cetera, et cetera.
So I think my answer would be, it's more of a public health
model than it is of a
medical model in the way that ACC would approach things.
Right. Thank you very much. A question from Dan Rosewarne.
Thank you, Chair. Thanks, Dave, for that contribution.
I just want to get a sense of if you see any
training burdens that this bill would create across workplace
providers,
if you see any in the
bill as it's written now.
I think
the way that I see it at the moment, Dan, is
less of a training burden, we have a non-training burden.
I think if you look at, say for example, with the health and safety reps, and
I had some involvement in early days discussion
about the concept of the health and safety reps, and I think the failure of
that system to perform has been an ongoing cost for us.
And I think
you put money into elements of
training,
particularly around gradual onset, and it's more difficult to
measure the return on that, but that doesn't mean to say we shouldn't be doing it.
And again, I would point to the need to take on more public
health models of
cost-benefit ratio if we're going to truly understand how to
get the really persistent costs down
for
all of our
work sectors.
And if I may add to that, Dan,
to just support what Dave was saying is, I think from
working in the primary industry, that I have seen firsthand that it
is that lack of explicit framework that can really
add to a lot of confusion
and could be somewhat misunderstanding,
when we are working on
different
level of understanding of what we need to achieve, in the system.
And in the long run too, that no doubt, that it also
adds that long-term,
I see that there is a long-term implication
on the generational impact, particularly on production,
that when we're
not being
explicit in our expectation, then
it's already under the
old legislation that we are working based on a lot of
individual interpretation, then it does,
in the long run,
reduce individual productivity.
And I think not only that
will cost the business, but also cost the individual.
And when it comes to the early onset of
musculoskeletal long-term
diseases, I personally have a firsthand experience
on that, that not only that it affects the individual
emotionally,
psychosocially, but also productivity hugely,
because I have just had that recent experience myself.
So from an early,
from a,
I suppose, a student getting into my early health and safety career path
there, what I really would love to see is some
certainty on what is the framework that I need to study and
develop myself towards to, and the certainty
that what I'm learning and studying is going
to add to and build onto the experience and my expertise
that I can then
later on, move across different sectors.
And
yeah.
Sorry. Thank you both. We're now at the end of our time with you, but we do really
appreciate your contribution to this process.
So thank you for being with us this morning.
Okay. Thank you for the opportunity. Thanks, everyone.
Thank you for the opportunity.
All the best.
Bye.
Thank you. We'll move on now to Jane Payman.
Jane,
we have you for five minutes.
Welcome, Jane-
Kia ora
... for being with us this morning.
The five minutes includes time for questions, and that is
time you can use it how you like. We'll start with you now.
Yeah. I guess I just wanted to talk to my submission,
umI have a perspective from
government, from being a union delegate in the PSA, and I've also
got lived experience of health and safety in the workplace.
I have many reflections on health and safety.
I worked in abortion law reform when I worked at the Ministry of Health,
so we had a health and safety person come along and talk to us about how to keep
ourselves well, not walking into buildings by ourselves, because we were
going up to Auckland for some select committee hearings where people
were presenting,
and at that point in time, you weren't doing anything by Zoom, you were doing it in
person. So a lot of the health and safety legislation has
changed, and just being aware that it's been 10 years since
that's been updated.
But yeah, I think I would
like the committee to just reflect on that we need to take account of our
geography, of our different circumstances here.
We're a small country, far away in the corner of the world, that has
earthquakes, volcanoes, and risks from climate change.
Natural disasters cause trauma, PTSD,
for people recovering from being in an earthquake or a first responder at a
volcanic eruption.
They can have a huge impact on your life.
So anything after that,
just a small thing might be quite a critical risk for that person.
It might not seem like a critical risk for the business, but I think just
reflect that people have different stories, people have different backgrounds,
and being able to help and support people to
stay well in the workplace as well.
But, yeah, happy to take questions.
That's probably more useful than me talking more about my submission.
But yeah, just wanting to let you know what angle I'm coming from there. Yeah.
Thank you really a lot there for that, Jane. I appreciate it.
Just a quick question from me. You talk about reasonably
practicable. A lot of the time we've heard from submitters up until this point
about defining or definition of critical risk.
What do you see
from the last time the legislation was updated to now,
and forgive me, this question's slightly
vague, but
it's a very hard to define situation, isn't it?
I mean, I worked in industry
and working out to me what was reasonably practicable versus to someone else
what is reasonably practicable. Do you see that being the same as the definition
for critical risk? And could you possibly ever define something?
Do you have a view on that?
I would see them as slightly different.
I think if you're looking at critical risk from a mental health and psychosocial
perspective, it depends on the person, it depends on what they do for
work, and it depends on the environment that they work in as
well. So
yeah, I guess the person that has committed suicide, if
there's something after that, that's a critical risk because they've committed
suicide before, so always the
preserving of life should be the highest critical risk
there.
I guess
from my experience, I think
managers need training and they also need guidance, process
maps, and conversation guides
to help work out how critical that is.
I don't think there should be a definition of critical from a mental health and
psychosocial perspective that is quite
specific.
Right.
And again, talking about critical risk, when you have mental harm,
you're telling that person that it's not important enough for them to
notify, to rectify, or do anything about it.
So reasonably practicable, I guess if it's
possible for the workplace to do that, then that is reasonably practicable.
I think so-
Again, it depends on the sector as well there, as to how you're defining that.
Yeah.
Yeah. And I think my question probably, and sorry for the ambiguity, was more
around, is there a danger in being
so focused on a definition,
and less focused on the outcome? You're talking about preserving
life, right? So, we've just heard from a lot of people about
the importance of defining critical risk, and people almost want a prescriptive
list, but there is a danger in that.
And so I think what I'm asking you is, do you see,
you've alluded to what's the outcome? What do we want to see?
Do you see that maybe being a better way of us approaching it?
What are we trying to achieve rather than how strict we are with the
definitions?
Yeah. I guess I see that there should be a
flowchart first, that you have a question guide or
process map where you're like, "Oh, what's happened?" Or,
"We have this risk in the workplace.
How critical is it for us as a business as well as the person?"
There are different flowcharts for you to work through, so you can work through
questions of,
this has happened before in the business. We've got an easy solution to this.
This is easy to fix. This is feasible.
We just need to
do this, this, this, and this to solve this.
Whereas if you're working through the impact of the risk on the person,
again, giving managers the guide to say, "What's going on for you right
now?
How is this affecting you?"
Identify the level of impact on the person to
identify,
I guess the more impact it has on a person, the more critical the risk is for the
business as well. The more costly it gets, the more... Yeah.
So having those two process maps, you can get through to definitions at the bottom
to say, from a psychosocial perspective, this is a critical risk.
If you're looking at, say, earthquakes and attaching stuff to walls, if you've
got 25 people near that wall, that's a bigger risk than it is if there's two.
So
having that definition at the end so you can say, "This is critical."
But you would hope that you would still be notifying
all of your risks, but trying to, as you say, make sure
you're tackling the critical ones first.
So it can be a flowchart of first, second, third,
how you work through that, navigating risk profile a little bit differently.
So I think just from what I'm understanding from what you're saying is, from your
experience, you see the only solution as being a prescriptive
one.
I don't think it should be so prescriptive.
I think what I'm trying to allude to is that every situation's different.
Everyone has different baseline mental health.
It could depend on your manager as well as to
how that works. But,
yeah, I think supporting managers to do that and giving them the time to have
training and
asking the right questions to work that out. Not everybody has that skill.
So you need to assume that the people that are assessing that have been
trained in health and safety, and also trained in mental health
and physical health in relation to that. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you so much for your submission, and putting
yourself in part of this process as well. So we do appreciate it.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
Okay. No problem.
Thank you. So we now have
New Zealand
Occupational Hygiene Society. We have,
I believe, a slightly different
submitter than we were expecting, Mariska and Nadine?
Correct. Yes.
Yes. Hello.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that includes time for
questions. So we'll hand over to you.
Thank you very much. Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to
present to our submission verbally. My name is Mariska Gerber.
I'm the president of the New Zealand Occupational Hygiene Society.
And as you've just mentioned, my colleague, Nadine Barnard, she's a
NZOHS counselor and also a member on our technical advisory
subcommittee who supported with the development of the submission.
So just a bit about us. So NZOHS is a volunteer-based
professional body for occupational hygienists in New Zealand.
We have 155 members, and we're also a member association of
HAZards. Occupational hygiene is a highly specialized and
scarce health and safety profession, but focuses on identifying,
assessing, and controlling workplace health risks that could lead to
long-term illness and disease, with the focus there on health risks.
In simple terms, it's really about preventing our people from getting
sick from work. So that could be from exposures to chemicals,
dust, silica, asbestos, noise. The list goes on.
We support the bill's focus on critical risks and improving health
outcomes. However, we've identified a few things that could
be strengthened and adjusted to ensure that the objectives are met with the
impact intended. So as per previous
submitters, we take the paper as read, but want to highlight a few key things,
and also then we'll have some time for questions at the end.
The first thing, which I also have seen you've received quite a bit of feedback on
already, is the definition of critical risks, and the word likely.
So we believe this word creates significant ambiguity,
especially because many occupational diseases such as cancers, respiratory
illness, noise-induced hearing loss, develop over time from
repeated low-level exposures and may not appear likely to a
business in the short term, but that can actually lead to misclassification
or perceived as non-critical, and therefore missed critical controls.
We recommend replacing the word likely with known or suspected to,
to better align with how health risks are
managed and also internationally are managed.
Also, on a note with the Schedule 1A of critical risks, we
appreciate the inclusion of substances that are hazardous to health as
one of the hazards associated with critical risks.
We would just recommend a clearer definition and guidance for that term because
it is extremely broad and not well understood from
experience out in industry, and that could further lead to gaps in health
risk management or even just misclassification.
That's the one point. The second point is about the exemption of small businesses,
which I know you've also had quite a bit of feedback on, so I'll keep it brief.
But in short, we do have some concerns with this, especially because
if the risks are non-critical or identified as non-critical, they
could actually be unmanaged or misclassified, or even the risk being
shifted to the workers and their customers, and that will in itself increase
harm, especially the chronic harm, the musculoskeletal conditions, et cetera,
that was already mentioned. So we recommend removing that exemption,
but instead applying a proportionate requirement.
So the risks need to be managed based, or the effort that you put in
needs to be managed according to the level of risk that you have.
So manage your risks according to the size of the business, the
nature of the business, and the risk of that business.
And then lastly, a key point there is about competency and
quality of advice. Now, during the roadshows, the minister heard quite
substantially about the poor quality advice that businesses have been
receiving, and we can attest to that because we are increasingly seeing poor
quality advice, especially from unqualified individuals
that's providing these specialist services such as occupational hygiene.
And in essence, businesses are paying more to now
correct that inadequate work that was originally done.
And the reason being is currently there's no clear requirement for competency in
many areas such as health risk assessment and exposure monitoring, and
this results in increased costs for businesses, a lot of rework, people
now having a lack of trust in the system, and ultimately poorer health outcomes
for our workers.
Our recommendation is therefore to strengthen the competency requirements through
the act and supporting regulations, and to include title
protection and clear minimum standards for those providing specialist health and
safety services such as occupational hygienists.
So specifically where we can say exposure monitoring and specialist occupational
health risk assessments should be undertaken, or under the supervision of a
competent occupational hygienist, proposed by the submission to be someone
defined in the legislation as being a full or fellow member of the New Zealand
Occupational Hygiene Society, or certified by an
international occupational hygiene association member society with
national accreditation recognitionSo embedding this into the
regulations will provide that clarity to PCBUs, improve the quality
and consistency, reduce the rework and the cost the business has
originally undertaken, and then also ultimately ensuring a better health
outcome for our workers.
Now, just in saying that, it is not out
of alignment with what we are currently doing for other specialized practices, such
as health monitoring, whereas the regulations require that to be
done all under the supervision of an occupational health practitioner.
It's also in alignment with some international standards where several countries
have adopted title protection or even regulatory professional
designations for occupational hygienists, meaning individuals cannot use
the title without meeting defined competency, qualifications, and
experience.
I will now hand over to Nadine, who will just give us some practical
implementations of these in real-life settings.
Thanks, Nadine.
Thanks, Mariska, and hi, everyone.
So in summary from what Mariska said,
from a practical perspective, what we see on the ground level is that health risks
are often less visible and receive less attention than safety risks
and are therefore more easily deprioritized or incorrectly classified.
We see that without clear definitions and expectations, businesses tend to focus on
what is easiest to demonstrate rather than what is easiest to
comply with or what they should be complying with.
And we also see that where there's ambiguity or misunderstanding,
it's often interpreted in a way that reduces effort rather than actually
reducing the risk and putting the effort in where it's needed.
So without
repeating what Mariska said, just in short,
as occupational hygienists, what we see is that the impact of
poor or non-specialized advice in the form of incorrect health
risk assessments and approaches,
it has very critical effects as it has
incorrect or non-pragmatic advice on ground level,
or inexperience
devalues the intent and the purpose of the health risk assessment at the end of the
day. And it could hold significant risks to businesses and to the industry
as a whole. Some examples of that is, for example, we see
exposure monitoring being implemented as
advice by non-specialized occupational hygienists or generalists,
and that hold
a significant impact to businesses because they feel they have to do exposure
monitoring for all of the hazards.
And it takes that focus away from those critical risks, and it
has businesses spend a lot of money
to implement controls and do exposure monitoring where it's not really
necessary at the end of the day. And of course, the opposite of that is
also true, not having exposure monitoring where it's really needed because it
wasn't identified as soon as it should have been or could have been.
So in short, strengthening competency requirements and clarifying expectations will
improve consistency across New Zealand, reduce the rework and cost for
businesses, and most importantly, prevent worker harm where it occurs.
So I will allow time for questions now.
We've taken up a lot of the time, but thank you so much for inviting us and, yeah,
we look forward to your questions.
Wonderful. We have a question from Dr Pamjit Parmar.
Thank you for your submission. Just curious to know, you talked about people, those
who are not qualified and providing advice to businesses and what happens as a
result is businesses have to spend more later on because of the mistakes
that are made. So how many kind of cases do you come across like
that, where you realize that the initial advice
was provided by some unqualified
people, those who were presenting themselves as professionals and had to come to
somebody who is your member to get their situation fixed?
Thank you for the question.
As it stands, we obviously don't have accurate data because
we can only reflect on those that actually come to the competent
individuals in the end.
But we do see, on an ad hoc basis, maybe a couple a month,
where there needs to be a rework done.
And as I mentioned, those are just the ones that we know of.
We are
only a
professional association, so businesses won't necessarily come to us
initially.
A lot of this may come under the attention of WorkSafe, where
they actually see businesses and the reports from
non-specialized individuals.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Nadine, did you have a comment on that?
Sorry, just to wrap up this question.
No. You summarized it well.
Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you very much for your submission.
It has been a very detailed and helpful submission for us to
utilize, so we appreciate your participation in the process.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Zoran Rakovic.
Good morning, everyone.
Good morning.
Madam Chair.
Welcome.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for-
We've got 5 minute, oh, sorry, 10 minutes.
Five minutes.
No, we've five minutes. Sorry, let me confirm that.
We have five minutes with you this morning. That includes time to questions.
Over to you.
Thank you very much for giving me opportunity to have a say
about this bill. My name is Zoran Rakovic.
I live in Selwyn District, where a lot of work is
done in small teams on farms, workshops, construction
sites, and I wanted to
present a few, I suppose, case
studies or examples from real life that would supplement
my written submission.
So first item is related to the classification of critical risk.
The bill says that it's something that could
likely cause serious injury. And if
we look at, for example, a fencing contractor who uses
um-hammers and augers to install
posts. The crushing and entanglement injury
would be serious, but also unlikely to happen.
So the comment I want to make is that
the wording should be changed, that critical
risk includes hazards that could
be foreseeable, not only likely, because likely could
be interpreted as low probability.
The other one is cumulative harm,
vibration, noise,
exposure to dust, chemicals, things like that.
That's currently proposed to be downgraded in terms of
the risk profile. But those
consequences, as we also heard in the previous
submission, could be quite serious.
And what I'm proposing that
small businesses should also manage those foreseeable risks, even
though they may be over a period of time and not
that intense
in terms of
immediate
consequence, but the ultimate consequence could be quite harmful.
About
approved code of practice, I think that there is a
potential that these are seen as a ceiling rather than a
bottom.
For example, a contractor uses the approved code of practice,
but there are some bits and pieces in their operation that are quite specific
and could lead to harm. So what I'm proposing is
that the bill quite clearly states that
approved codes of practice are sufficient
for the cases covered by it, which would be
normal cases, but any other operation should
look at their own specific
risks and hazards, and cover them, so this
code of practice becomes a floor rather than a ceiling.
And also another one is related to
recreational access to properties.
I
somehow felt that
it may not be that clear,
the distinction between a person who is, for
example, riding a horse and wants to go across a paddock
through somebody else's farm, but is charged a small fee for the
upkeep of the gate and the
track, versus
a vineyard owner who organizes a concert and charges
an entry ticket and makes money out of that
activity.
Perhaps
some
clarification is given
in that regard. And maybe as a last
suggestion is to perhaps
provide some worked examples and
some guidances to
people who may see the act or this
bill as something overwhelming, to give them some
clarity and, yeah. So thank you very much for the opportunity to
submit.
Thank you, Zoran. It's very much appreciated.
I have just a quick question for you.
Sure.
We've heard a lot about the request for clarity, for
stronger definitions. Do you see there being a possible
way for this legislation to go
through with there being more
interpretation
requirement for organizations, or do you feel like it really has to be
quite black and white for people to be able to follow along
safely?
Well, in my written submission, I made some specific
suggestions, and I think if those are adopted, I think the bill should
be good to go. And,
yeah.
That's great, Zoran.
Yeah. And in a sense, I
think the main comment is regarding this likely-
Mm.
Word likely being
interpreted as low probability.
Yeah.
I think if that's fixed, the major flaw would be
fixed.
Thank you. Because I just feel like this is very similar to people's
concern with the words reasonably practicable when we last talked
about this
some time ago. So just appreciate your perspective on it. Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter, so thank you for your time.
Thank you. Bye.
Right. Our next submitter is STAND Up Youth Union
Movement with Xavier Walsh.
Oh, look at that. You're the fastest person to jump onto this hearing.
Thanks.
Thank you, Xavier. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, that
includes time for questions, and it is over to you now.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ngā mihi maioha ki a koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on this bill.
I want to begin with absolute clarity.
This bill will kill children. It will kill young
workers. It will kill people whose deaths are entirely
preventable. And this is not rhetoric.
It is the predictable evidence-based outcome of weakening the system
designed after Pike River to stop exactly that.
My name is Xavier Walsh, and I'm the co-convenor of STAND Up, the CTU's
Youth35 network, representing Kai Mahia Rangatahi across Aotearoa.
I'm also here as someone who employs staff and chairs boards.
I retire this year as co-president of Unite Union, with six years'
experience under my belt, and I'm undertaking a PhD in Māori
studies on personal grievances.
I'm 23 years old, and I am responsible for people's livelihoods
and their safety. I take that responsibility.
This bill does not, nor can it ever purport
toAt best, this bill is built on a
fundamental misunderstanding of harm prevention.
I don't know if you can see it, but I've brought Heinrich's Triangle, accident
triangle with me today. It's the diagram taught to
first-year health and safety students, and yet I'm bringing it to
Parliament because this bill assumes that only critical
risks matter, the ones at the top. I don't know if you can see it that well.
Heinrich's Triangle shows that serious harm does not emerge out of
nowhere. Fatalities sit at the top, are built on hundreds of
minor accidents, near misses, and system
failures. When you narrow duties to only critical risks, you remove the
very mechanisms that prevent those critical risks from ever
materializing, but I shouldn't have to be explaining this to Parliament.
After Pike River, the Royal Commission's recommendations were accepted in full.
My understanding of what happened comes directly from Chris
Finlayson, then Minister of Labor.
Helen Kelly walked into his office expecting a fight and
instead found a national minister who understood the weight of
29 deaths. He understood that the system had
failed catastrophically, and that the only responsible
action was to strengthen it. This bill takes us backwards.
It forgets the dead. It forgets the families.
It forgets the bipartisan consensus forged in the darkest
moment of our lived industrial history, and it forgets
the Health and Safety at Work Act was not an ideological project, it was a moral
one.
Young workers are disproportionately harmed at work.
We are more likely to be in precarious jobs in high-risk industries with less
power to speak up. We are more likely to be told just to get on with it,
and more likely to be punished for raising concerns.
Take hospitality, my own industry.
A 2022 Human Rights Commission study found that 43% of
young workers had been sexually harassed and 48%
had experienced bullying in the previous 12 months alone.
Around 80% of businesses in the sector are SMEs, and the issues
I raise are not critical risks under this bill.
This is but one example, a coin flip for sexual
harassment,
and yet young workers were not genuinely consulted on this bill.
The consultation was rushed, shallow, and performative.
It was not designed to listen. It was designed to tick a box.
This is a pattern. In industrial relations, this government
legislates first and asks questions later.
I also want to speak as an employer. I chair boards. I hire staff.
I'm responsible for ensuring the people who work for me go home safe.
This bill does not give me clarity. It gives me ambiguity.
It creates a new, poorly defined category of critical risks that will be
interpreted differently across industries, PCBUs, and
inspectors. Don't even get me started about the systematic gutting of
WorkSafe. It creates a two-tier system where small
PCBUs have weaker duties than large ones, even though small
workplaces are often the least resourced and the most dangerous.
If the goal is certainty, this bill fails on
its own terms. It is the role of the committee to
look directly at the submissions in front of you.
We at STAND UP would like to particularly tautoko a submission from the Young
Workers Resource Center, the Healthy Work Group, Mental Health
Foundation, and the CTU, and affiliated trade unions.
But I challenge you to engage with the sheer volume of literature, decades of
it, that tell you this bill is wrong.
The evidence is overwhelming. Weaken the system and you get more
accidents, more injuries, and more deaths.
This is not a political claim. It is a documented pattern
across jurisdictions. This bill disregards psychosocial
risk entirely, despite it being one of the fastest-growing and most severe
sources of workplace harm. We're already miles behind Australia.
We can't even ban engineered stone despite knowing the harm of
silicosis, the asbestos of our day.
It contradicts our obligations under the ILO and other EU-aligned
frameworks, including our EU free trade agreement, which recognize the full
spectrum of risks, not just the risks that are easiest to see.
And the cost of harm does not disappear. It shifts.
It shifts to ACC, to hospitals, to long-term rehabilitation,
to employer and insurance premiums, and to families who
carry the lifelong impact of bad work.
Every shortcut taken in this bill will be paid for somewhere else and
paid for dearly. The evidence is clear.
Weakening the system will increase harm.
Experts across the sector have stated as such, not might,
will. It narrows duties, it narrows accountability, it
undermines the preventative approach recognized internationally as best
practice, and it shifts the purpose of the act away
from managing all risks to managing only some.
And the minister who champions this bill does so without
evidence, without mandate, and without regard for the people who
ultimately will pay the price.
So as you can tell, I am angry.
I'm angry because this bill is not grounded in evidence or in the lived experience
of workers or, heaven forbid, their employers or those who died
sadly at Pike River. It is grounded in ideology,
the ideology that regulation is inherently bad, that employers know
best, and that harm is an acceptable cost of doing business.
Young workers reject that ideology.
The union movement rejects that ideology.
Anyone who has ever been at a gravesite as a result of a
preventable workplace death
rejects that ideology.
And so I just want to close where I began.
If you pass this bill,
you will own the consequences, and when the next preventable death
happens, and it will, you will not be able to say you were not
warned. Their blood will be on your
handsYoung workers deserve better, workers'
families deserve better, Aotearoa deserves better.
Nō reira, tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for your submission, Xavier. Can I just ask a question?
You mentioned earlier about the difference in opinion on critical risk.
Could you give me an example of what,
from your worker perspective, what you would see as a critical risk and give me the
example of the workplace and what your employer would see as the critical risk?
Well, currently, I work as a bartender, and so there
aren't many critical risks. I mean, the greatest being
psychosocial hazards, are in my opinion.
I have been assaulted, I have been spat at, I have people
threatening to hit me, and yet that, I mean, is
that technically a risk? I would say that the psychosocial effects
are actually much greater, and the people around me who then have to come
around to support me also then face that, and yet this bill does nothing
to achieve that. In Australia, different jurisdictions have now started working
on psychosocial risk, and yet we're moving backwards.
They banned engineered stone, as I said. We're not doing that.
We're just not moving forward. We're moving backwards.
So, and just to come back to my question, do you think your
employer would disagree with you that that was the biggest risk as a bartender,
the personal assaults from public?
Probably not, no. I mean-
No
... they've experienced it too.
No, but that's good to know. I guess what I'm trying to draw from this is that in
that particular workplace, you and your employer would probably agree that that
would be the biggest risk.
Well, I think, so I work on K Road, and we're all pretty woke
lefties.
I will give you that, but it's quite different, right?
I have a lot more power and say and autonomy and voice,
but that's different again. And if I say I also work at the
University of Auckland, and we don't see eye to eye on health and safety at all
half the time.
Okay.
They don't necessarily consider psychosocial risk in the least, but that's not
hospitality.
No, that's very interesting and a helpful insight, so thank you so much, Xavier.
Appreciate your contribution to this process and your fulsome submission as
well.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thanks.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have New Zealand Plant Producers, and we have,
by my understanding, Matthew Dolan
submitting.
Welcome, Matthew.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes
time for questions, so we'll hand over to you now.
Thank you very much.
Good morning. I assume you can hear me?
Yes, very well.
Thank you, and thanks for the opportunity to hear our submission.
So look, my name's Matthew Dolan. I'm the Chief Executive at New Zealand Plant
Producers. We're an industry body representing plant
nurseries. There are around 350 businesses
involved in this industry, and they produce plants right across the primary
industries, forestry,
viticulture, horticulture,
native restoration, and what we call green life, which is your garden supply
chains and also the landscape industry.
Worth about $500 million and employs around
4,500 people. It's mostly a domestic-facing industry.
There's a range of risks in our industry, mostly around using machinery,
hazardous substances, repetitive work, and those seasonal work
pressures that you hear in other parts of the primary industries.
We share those risks as well.
Look, we really support the overall intent of the bill.
We think this is a great opportunity to simplify the health and safety system and
provide clarity, particularly to small to medium-sized businesses, of
which many plant nurseries are.
But we believe there's some areas here that could be enhanced in the bill.
So the first area we covered in our submission was around that balance
between critical risk and other more general risks.
Look, we really understand that
the health and safety regime really should focus on those critical
risks, but not forgetting the day-to-day
general risks that sort of are the
general flow of the industry, that manual handling, the repetitive tasks,
ergonomics, posture, those sorts of things.
These are the main things that come up in our statistics on harm in our sector that
need to be managed day to day. So what we're saying is absolutely focus
on those critical risks, but then also make sure that we do have really good
systems and frameworks in place for the rest of it.
The next area we covered was those codes of practice. Really support those.
Systemizing health and safety is the way to do it, and through those recognized
codes of practice is the most effective way to scale that and get people to
understand and engage in the system.
They are really effective and critical.
But what we have found in the past is that smaller industries like ours tend to
miss out on those codes of practice.
What we have found in the primary industries is funding, effort,
resources that get allocated to developing those codes of practice
seem to get spent on the big sectors.
By the time you get down to sectors like us, we've run out of time, we've run out
of resource, and we get to pick up and finish the job
ourselves. So,
the reality is that the result of that, after decades, is that we don't have
a well-structured system of codes of practice.
It's not what drives health and safety in our industry, and that's what we'd like
to see change.
There are winners and losers in the current system.
As I say, resource allocation, the access to skilled expertise,
the time, the funding, the resources, by the time it gets down to our smaller
sectors, has tended to run out. And look, that's something
I think that is a real opportunity to manage in this
reform.
The next area we covered was around the small business carve-out.
We understand that, and we really appreciate any efforts to make business
easier, just particularly in this environment.
You would've heard that many times through this process, I'm sure.But once
again, we think you risk setting up a two-tier system there
where, again, there is priority given to large businesses and that
smaller businesses are maybe forgotten or
under-resourced in that system.
Look, I don't have a solution for you in this regard, but I do
believe that there is an opportunity there to take a systems
approach to bring in those smaller businesses and really support them in
the framework
and ensure that they're not just forgotten.
The other area we covered, and this is covered very well in Horticulture
New Zealand's submission,
is around alignment with other regulatory systems.
There is a massive opportunity here to build efficiency and to build that systems
approach into the health and safety system by looking at where
businesses are complying or meeting other areas of
regulation, particularly around hazardous substances.
We think that is a massive opportunity to explore to create efficiency and
clarity in the system. If another regime is sufficient,
then let's work with that
and bring across the evidence to demonstrate compliance to the health and safety
system.
That's the way we work
industry practice in our industry, and it seems to be
effective.
And finally, I'll just cover off my final point, which is the role of WorkSafe.
At the moment, we don't see a lot of WorkSafe.
When we do see them up driveways, it's a bit ad hoc.
It's very much about engagement.
We are hoping that by building more structure in the health and safety system, when
they visit, there is really meaningful engagement and there is
that real connection between WorkSafe and the system that
the business can engage in.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Just a quick question from me.
You're talking about potentially the plant producers being missed through the
ACOPS.
I'm just picking up on a thread from a few different submitters about the desire
for a really
well-defined prescribed solution or at least guidance.
Do you think it's possible to do that for
everyone, or is there inevitably going to be industries or groups
missed,
hence why perhaps maybe having it more of an
interpretable solution being a better option?
Yeah, look, it is about how you structure engagement with industry, and there's
some really good examples in other parts of government where this is done well.
Particularly in the biosecurity system is a great example of how to do that,
where you are bringing multiple industries around the table, working
together on areas that they have in common.
Yeah.
And you are then able to scale and improve the guidance.
There is no difference in the guidance in hazardous substances from an apple grower
to a plant nursery.
There's very little difference. There's more in common than different.
So why not take the opportunity to scale that into maybe a plants' health and
safety framework?
Great. Thank you. That's really helpful. We have a question from Dr. Pamjit Pahma.
Thank you so much for your submission.
You talked about the importance of balancing both critical risk and the
everyday kind of risks in your sector.
And you mentioned a little bit about the everyday risks.
So could you please elaborate on that?
Because I'm trying to understand what are the kind of specific everyday
risks that you think might get overlooked with the approach that is there in this
legislation.
Yeah, and I think
it is really around that manual handling, those repetitive tasks.
When you're running a plant nursery, you're moving thousands, literally thousands
of plants. And
it's that low-level ongoing
fatigue, wear and tear, slips, trips, that sort of stuff,
which is common across most primary industries.
And
ours is different, but not overly different from what you would see in another
manufacturing or farming operation.
It is very similar. And
once again, I think it comes back to the opportunity to scale the solution,
not look to bespoke industry by industry, task by task.
That's important at a level, but the overarching system should really bring
in,
in that really scaled and supported way,
dealing with those lower-level risks.
I guess from the outside and from looking at those
high-risk industries, they really are critical, and
we're concerned that they will get the attention, and then by the time we get down
to those day-to-day,
more
garden variety risks,
that it gets forgotten.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Alan, for your contribution to this process and
a very helpful submission, both written and verbal.
We'll move on now to our next submitter as well. So thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks, Matthew. So we've got now the Rail Maritime
Transport Union.
I believe we've got Karen Fletcher online with us for this.
Hello?
Hello. Karen, welcome.
Hi.
How are you? We have the
Health and Safety at Work Act Amendment Bill in front of us at the moment.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes time for questions.
So we are in your hands now. Thank you.
Thank you. Mōrena kotou. My name is Karen Fletcher.
I work with the Rail Maritime Transport Union, which is the RMTU.
Our union has 6,000 or over 6,000 members working
across the rail and the port sector.
We'll take our submission as read, but to be clear, we strongly oppose the Health
and Safety Amendment Bill, and I'll explain why.
But first, I want to explain what our office looks like.
So when you come into our office, you'll see that there are actually
posters all over the walls of our office.
And on those posters are faces of people, our members,
people in rail and ports who have been killed
or seriously injured in our industry.
And it's a reminder to us that health and safety is core union
business because everybody has the right to-To go home in the same fit
state that they arrived that day. So
that's why we're passionate about health and safety and protecting
the rights. They have the right to stay alive and the right to not be harmed
for our workers.
So some of you will remember the late '90s and the early 2000s,
was a particularly tragic time for workers in the rail industry.
During that time, 11 rail workers were killed within a five-year
period. That was in separate incidents. That's 11 people killed.
Rail at that time had a worker fatality rate of eight times
the national average.
It's important to tell you
that
during that period, so between '91 and 2002,
rail was actually excluded from the general health and safety
legislation. And it was that exemption, as well as other factors
such as the fallout of the privatisation of rail, which
contributed to such a shocking fatality rate, which, as I've said, was eight
times the national average.
Those tragedies in the '90s led to a ministerial inquiry in the early
2000s, which resulted in significant improvements, one of which
was that rail was actually brought back under the
health and safety legislation at the time.
So that was in the early 2000s. So I want to talk about the ports as
well. So more recently, you'll be aware that the ports have
had a shocking fatality rate. Between 2012
and 2022, there were 18 deaths of port
workers in New Zealand. I'm just talking about deaths, not the serious injuries.
Of course, there are many more of those.
Averaging almost two fatalities a year, and those critical risks
included things like falls from height or people being crushed
between containers or machinery.
In 2022, the
then minister ordered an inquiry into the sector,
and
it found that in New Zealand, our port workers were twice
as likely to be killed at work than in the
UK, and three times the fatality rate of port workers
in Hong Kong. And it struck me at the time that those results really
echoed the earlier Post Pipe River independent task
force that found that New Zealand really lags,
lagged then and continues to lag behind the UK and
Australia in terms of the number of people who are
seriously injured and killed.
In the port sector,
following that review, a lot of work's been done in a
tripartite way, led by the
regulator, Maritime New Zealand
including the industry and the unions, and has resulted in things like
development of an approved code of practice for loading and unloading ships, which
has been very successful, and the industry is continuing to work
really well together in a tripartite way to improve that
shocking record. So just to say that
our union considers the Health and Safety at Work Act as
it is to be largely fit for purpose.
But in recent years, it's been unsupported.
So as you know, our current legislation, it mirrors the Aussie
legislation. It's just about the same, apart from one or two words.
But the difference is ours is not underpinned with a suite of
regulations and approved codes of practice and guidance that theirs
is. So employers and workers in Australia have a much
clearer picture of what they need to do because of the suite of regulations and
guidance, but they also have very well-resourced regulators and high
levels of intervention.
So when Haswell Health and Safety at Work Act came in in 2015,
the improvement to health and safety just went up.
It was a massive increase, and it was a really good piece of
legislation, and we saw clear improvement, and then in the last few years, it's
kind of plateaued off.
But if we want to emulate the Aussies and the UK, we need to do what
they're doing, which is underpinning their legislation with
proper regulation and guidance because the system we have is sort of just
unfinished and then, of course, underfunded with the gutting of
WorkSafe
not that long ago.
That's what our members say to us. They say, "If we want to be like Aussie, why
don't we just act like Aussie?"
It's kind of simple if you think about it like that.
So then the next thing I want to talk about is the part of
the bill that says,
"If a person conducting a business or undertaking
complies with relevant requirements under the other legislation to manage
risk, they'll be treated as having complied with their duties under the Health and
Safety at Work Act."
In rail, our industry is currently regulated by two pieces of
legislation, the Railways Act and the Health and Safety at Work Act.
The Railways Act provides a lower level of protection for workers
than the Health and Safety at Work Act.
It's administered by a different regulator, the NZTA or Kāpatai, who
don't have the same mandate as WorkSafe, who of course administers
the Health and Safety
at Work Act. WorkSafe, particularly its high hazards unit, has worked with the rail
sector and done some really important improvements, in
some of their more complex environments, such as rail tunnels.
And because of their involvement, we've got much better controls,
actually, around things like adequate respiratory protection for
working in tunnels that have irrespirable atmosphere.
We're really concerned that the Amendment Bill could
result in the Railways Act becoming the dominant legislation governing
railways' health and safety, and that would take us backwards.
It would take us back to where we were before when rail
wasn't covered by the health and safety legislation, and as I've
already said, we were eight times the national average in terms of the
number of deaths.
So the Railways Act is more than 20 years old, and it has a very narrow
dutyTo ensure safety, and that
is that the test is that rail activities are managed
so that they are not likely to cause death or serious harm.
So there's that likely word again, that
other submitters have also said. It's very subjective, and it also sets a very high
threshold before action can be taken.
So, unlike the Railways Act, the Health and Safety at Work Act imposes a
broader duty of care, requiring the employer
to manage all risks really. Of course, higher level
controls for higher risks,
but it doesn't have that sort of likely threshold, which as it's very
subjective and actually a pretty high bar to get over in order to
put controls in place.
So just last week, I want to tell you about some delegate training I
ran. So I ran some health and safety training with a group of delegates in
Auckland,
and half the group were employed by
the commuter rail, so they worked on board with passengers, and the other half
worked on the rail network itself.
When I said, "What's your number one health and safety issue?" The people who
work on the trains said it was aggression.
Aggression and violence from
people on board, the customers. And the other half said it
was fatigue, which is
sort of making an error,
because they're fatigued due to very long hours of work and shift work.
So I reflected on this Health and Safety Amendment Bill
and thought, well, actually it is possible that under the Railways Act, neither of
these risks would meet the threshold of likely to cause death or
serious harm, because they're those low likelihood, high consequence
type events which risk assessment tools aren't very good at
weighing up. However, HSWA, because it's health has where
Health and Safety at Work Act, because it has a broader duty, it requires
controls to be in place. So that's things like
de-escalation training for onboard staff to be able to manage
aggressive people, or limits on hours of work to manage
fatigue. So the Health and Safety at Work Act
offers broader protection, and
it would be such a step backwards for us if that didn't remain the
dominant piece of legislation, because that's the legislation that keeps our
industry safe. The Railways Act would not.
To speak about ports, so in the maritime sector it's a similar sort of thing.
So seafarers on New Zealand ships are covered by both the Health and Safety at Work
Act and the Maritime Transport Act.
And Maritime New Zealand administers both pieces of
legislation. So the Maritime Transport Act focuses on vessel and
navigational safety, whilst HSWA focuses on the safety and health
of people working on the ships, and they operate together.
So there's a real negative potential consequence that if
HSWA became subordinate to the Maritime
Transport Act and the Railways Act, that would really
decrease the level of protection for our
members, so we really strongly oppose that aspect of the bill.
Thank you. Oh, Karen, just want to, sorry, interrupt.
Unfortunately, we've reached the end of our time with you this morning.
Oh.
Was there anything that you wanted to add? Ten minutes goes by really quickly.
Was there anything you wanted to quickly highlight before you finish, or is that
okay?
No, that's okay. That's all right.
Thank you, though, very much. It has been a very fulsome and detailed submission.
So we really appreciate it.
Okay, thanks.
Have a great day.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Lily Hall-Butcher.
Lily, welcome. We have you here for five minutes.
That includes time for questions.
Hello.
Now over to you. Welcome.
Tena koutou katoa. My name is Lily Pare Hall-Butcher, and I strongly
oppose this bill. This bill will cause harm to New Zealanders by
increasing the rate of ill health among workers.
There are a number of issues with this bill, my submission will focus on just a few
of them.
I am deeply disturbed by this bill's disregard for the safety of workers.
As I outlined in my written submission, making it legal for employers to ignore
all but so-called critical risks to the safety of their employers will endanger the
health of New Zealanders. In my written submission, I described how my aunt's
health was damaged by a type of workplace hazard that would be
deprioritized under this bill, repetitive strain injury or RSI.
Such an injury would be considered minor under this legislation, yet its impact on
my aunt's life was not minor. She suffered severe pain, lost the
use of one of her hands, which required surgery, and was unable to work during a
lengthy period of rehabilitation.
There were also negative impacts on her mental health, as she struggled as the sole
caregiver for her young daughter. I'm sure some of you are parents.
I'd like you to think of all the things you do in a day while taking care of your
children. Now imagine having to do all of those things with only one hand
while in excruciating pain. That was what my aunt had to deal
with.
The injury had long-term health impacts, as it permanently limited the range of
activities she was unable to undertake for the rest of her life.
Injuries such as that suffered by my aunt will be deprioritized under this bill,
which I believe will lead to an increase of ill health among New Zealand workers.
One of the purported aims of this bill is to cut costs, but I believe this bill
fails to account for the many costs of preventable illness and
injury. Besides the impact on my aunt's health, the financial
burden caused by my aunt's unemployment was immense.
It also caused disruption for her employer, who was forced to make alternative
arrangements, including hiring new
personnel.Becoming sick or injured is costly for both the
worker and the employer. Reducing prevention measures will lead to an
increase in the incidence of illness and injury, which has financial costs as
well as health-related costs. I believe this bill fails to adequately
consider these costs. Supposedly, the main justification
for this bill is that employers are confused about their obligations under the
current legislation, yet most respondents to the bill's
consultation process indicated that they, quote, "understand their work, health,
and safety obligations very well," with 89% of employers who
engaged with the process, quote, "answering positively about their understanding of
obligations." Many of the submissions noted that there was, quote,
"no problem with the act in general." In light of this evidence of strong
understanding of the current legislation among employers, the supposed
confusion seems a flimsy basis on which to make radical changes with
severe negative consequences to a crucial piece of legislation.
Furthermore, one
thing which respondents to the consultation process requested was a greater
emphasis on collaboration from WorkSafe.
Unfortunately, this bill deprioritizes WorkSafe's educational and collaborative
functions. Based on this evidence, I feel this bill will not the needs of
employers, and it is in fact more likely to cause confusion and
upheaval, especially given that it would come into effect the day after receiving
Royal Ascent, leaving no time for anyone to adjust to the new
system. This bill is bad for employers as well as endangering workers.
This bill is a shortsighted, ill-considered,
and irresponsible
piece of legislation which will endanger the lives and health of New Zealanders.
The committee must recommend that this bill be rejected. Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much, Lily. We do appreciate your contribution to the process.
It doesn't appear that we have any questions for you, but please don't take that as
a lack of interest. You've just provided us with a very detailed and
helpful submission, so we do appreciate it.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
And we have WorkDeck
with us now. I believe Dave Simmons.
Welcome, Dave.
Hi.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon, and that includes time for
questions, so we'll hand it over to you now.
Wonderful. Thanks very much. Chair, members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to present to you today. My name is Dave Simmons.
I'm a director of WorkDeck New Zealand.
WorkDeck was founded nine years ago by my colleague, David Grigger, a builder with
30 years of experience. David's mission when he set the business up was
very simple, to help New Zealanders' builders get home safely at the end of each
day.
Their mission was shaped by seeing firsthand the issues on New Zealand building
sites, and subsequently that in markets such as the UK,
better health and safety practices on construction sites was not only
possible, but already standard practice.
As a result, I'll stay focused today on the falls from heights in residential
construction.
I'd like to start with a simple question for the committee.
Do you know a builder,
a father perhaps, a partner, a brother, or a friend?
If you do, I strongly suspect there's a high chance that person has a
bad back, a dodgy shoulder, or has had a fall, or at the
very least, has worked in conditions where a serious fall was always
just one misstep away.
And I think that's worth reflecting on for a moment.
In New Zealand, somehow we've normalized these outcomes within the construction
sector, where too many good people go to work in an environment where
long-term physical damage is almost expected, and exposure
to critical risk is treated as part of the job.
I guess the question for this committee is: Is that acceptable?
We don't believe it is,
and that is why we believe the increased focus on critical risk in this bill is a
positive thing.
However, this bill will fail if it simply relabels what the
industry already does and calls it critical risk management.
If it's going to matter, it has to force a change in behavior and attitudes.
If you think of the hierarchy of controls, right now, the status quo on residential
construction is not risk prevention. It's not risk elimination.
It's not even risk isolation in most cases.
The practical reality is that the sector largely defaults to risk
mitigation at best. In fact, if you were to visit
10 residential construction sites today, you'd be hard-pressed to find
many that are doing anything more than risk mitigation when it comes to falls from
heights, and in some cases, even less.
And that gets to the heart of the issue.
The vast majority of construction companies are not starting with the question: How
do we eliminate or isolate the critical risk?
More often than not, they simply default to what is required to mitigate the risk
or tick the compliance box. That's not a prevention mindset, and
it's simply compliance. If
we're serious about critical risk, that mindset has to change.
Let me help you picture this a little more clearly.
Picture a standard residential building site.
An apprentice builder is standing trusses.
He or she is standing two or three meters in the air above a
concrete slab. They're standing on a 90-millimeter wide
top plate. Their boots are wider than the platform they're standing on.
They're wearing an eight-kilogram tool belt, and they're lifting a 30-kilogram
truss into place.
And often they're working under pressure because they've lost the previous day's
work to bad weather.
Now, anyone applying even a basic level of rational judgment can see that
the situation presents a serious critical risk.
It's not theoretical, it's not random.
It's visible, and it's foreseeable, and they are very real risks.
We've seen the human cost of getting this wrong repeatedly.
In one reported construction case, Chunder Limited and JMK
Homes, a builder fell three meters from an unguarded second-floor
void and suffered a broken spine, causing paralysis.In the
McKee Field Constructors case, a worker fell 3.9 meters onto
concrete and suffered significant head injuries, never to work
again. These are not abstract risks.
They're obvious, they're foreseeable construction risks, and they require clearer
prevention-focused controls.
And when a risk is that obvious, the regulatory system should not leave it to
individual interpretation.
The combined HSW Act and supporting ACASP should ensure the industry
clearly understands that this is a critical risk, and that the
expectation is to eliminate it or at the very least isolate it.
That is where we say there needs to be greater focus on the
definitions of critical risk to remove subjective
judgment.
In this space, in our space, based upon scientific evidence, where a person could
fall 1.3 meters or more, that is a critical risk.
Science proves that at that point, the risk of catastrophic injury or
death in the event of a fall is very real.
And importantly, that definition lines up with ordinary residential
building tasks, standing on top plates, framing, truss insulation, working within
partially competed structures.
So for us, there are three things that matter.
First, the regulatory framework needs to be much clearer about what the
definition of critical risk actually is in the falls from heights context.
Second, it needs to be much clearer about how that risk is to be
managed. If this is truly a critical risk, then the
expectation should be elimination first or isolation as the
default. Mitigation should not be treated as an acceptable
primary response, which is the default currently.
If all the reform does is allow the industry to keep doing what it already does
and simply relabels it as critical risk management, then nothing will be
achieved.
Third, the residential construction ACASP, which I appreciate is outside of the
scope of this, needs to remove ambiguity by clearly setting
out what acceptable practice looks like.
It should define what constitutes a fit-for-purpose working platform and
clearly define what is not, including the top plate.
What is acceptable for managing critical risk and what is not.
If the ACASP leaves too much open to interpretation, the industry will continue to
rely on habit, blokey judgment, convenience, and
minimum cost rather than clear prevention-focused standards.
And finally, none of this will matter without consistent targeted
enforcement. This is a sector that responds to what gets checked,
it responds to what gets enforced, and it responds to what gets
called out. So our message to the committee is simple.
If you want the regulatory framework to make a real difference in construction,
then the law and the ACASP need to do three things: clearly define critical
risk, clearly require elimination or isolation as the default,
and back that up with consistent enforcement.
If we get that right, this reform can save lives and help ensure New Zealand
construction workers get home safely at the end of the day.
If we get it wrong, this will be just another reform that ticks some boxes
but fails a young worker standing on that top plate two or three
meters in the air, oblivious to how quickly a slip of the foot or a
loss of balance can turn into a life-changing injury or death.
Thank you. Happy to take any questions.
Right. It doesn't appear... Oh, we do.
I was just going to say, Jan, you beat me to it.
We have a question from Jan Tinetti. Thank you.
Yeah. And thanks, Dave, for that. It's been fascinating
listening to the different issues that are facing all the different sectors with
the changing of this legislation.
You describe balance in your
written submission, you're describing balancing on framing
members or how they're doing that as kind of normalized practice.
In your view, is the
regulation or guidance the primary lever for
changing that culture?
Yeah, really interesting question.
Yes, is the fundamental play, right?
You're talking about an industry where
it is a very blokey kind of environment.
It's a number eight wire mentality in many instances.
And I can tell you, I've worked in the tourism industry for many years, and I've
more recently got involved in construction.
My observation would be health and safety is taken a lot more seriously
in tourism than what it is in construction, and that's largely
because of that sort of number eight wire mentality, particularly in the
residential building space. A little different in the larger commercial space,
but you've got a lot of small businesses who are interpreting what they need
to do or indeed actually not even aware of what they need to do in many
instances. So stronger regulatory framework with
enforcement, and within that enforcement, education and
enforcement is the only way in which we're going to drive behavioral
change.
That's really interesting. So I think I took a lot out of that
last bit. That's the enforcement with education.
That is-
Absolutely.
Yeah. Okay.
Absolutely. I've met people in the industry who don't know what a PCBU
is.
Wow.
And these are directors of companies, and they're completely oblivious to
what, A, a PCBU is or what their responsibilities are as
a PCBU. So we've got to get a lot better in terms of
both kind of getting clear around what is the definitions, if you like.
Get rid of the interpretation, the sort of subjective interpretation,
and then get that education and enforcement going quite strongly.
And if you get one or two cases called out, then the industry changes very quickly.
That's great. Thank you very much for that.
You're on mute, Katie.
Typical. Look, thank you, Dave, for your contribution to this process
and a detailed submission as well. I really appreciate the insights.
Thank you.
A pleasure. Thanks very much.
Thanks. We'll move on to our last submitter,
hopefully,
yes, NZASM are available. We have Mike Cosman, Robin Bennett,
and Jeff
SissonsLook
at that. There we go. Beautiful. If we could turn everyone's
cameras and audio on, we'll be able to hear from you once you're ready.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon, that includes time for questions.
It's over to you how you utilize that time. So we'll hand it to you now.
Lovely. Madam Chair and committee members, thank you very much for the opportunity
to address you. I'm Robyn Bennett, Chair of the New Zealand Institute of
Safety Management. With me online are Geoff Sissons, Chief
Executive, and Mike Cosgrove, who is the former Chair of NZISM
and a member of the independent task force that was set up after Pike River,
whose recommendations led to the creation of WorkSafe and to the
development of the current act. NZISM has over
3,200 members who are the health and safety experts
working every day with businesses of all sizes, from sole
traders to major infrastructure projects.
We are the people that help employers
apply health and safety in the real world.
Our submission has been deeply informed by our members' input and their
expertise. Given the constraints of time, we'll take our
submission as read. We'll aim to speak for five minutes and then move to
questions.
The Minister and her officials have handed the committee a major
problem in the form of a poorly drafted and badly
thought-through bill and a very short timeframe to address those
major flaws.
As we have noted in our submission, this haste is compounded by the
bill coming into force the day after royal assent.
This bill affects every organization in New Zealand but
leaves them with almost no time to get ready.
For example, by identifying and prioritizing their critical risks.
We ask the committee to consider a longer transition period of six
months.
Getting this bill wrong comes at significant cost to families,
communities, employers, and taxpayers.
We estimate the likely cost to ACC's work account
alone in the hundreds of millions of dollars, passed on
directly to employers via their levels.
As one of our members said, "I can't help but shake the feeling that we may
be sleepwalking into a set of fatal unintended consequences
in the name of political expediency."
These submissions are being heard very quickly and with very limited
time. Our plea is to give this bill due consideration
and deliberation rather than rushing it through.
We and other submitters are here to help and provide further
information and advice and support on any aspect of the bill that you
would like assistance on.
As we've said in our submission, we think that there are five major flaws with
the bill that need to be addressed before it should proceed back to the
House.
The inequitable small PCBU carve-out, the flawed
definition of critical risks, particularly in the inherent
ambiguity in the word likely,
the unconventional proposal around the
prioritization of critical risk for both PCBUs,
WorkSafe, and the whole system,
the risks of stagnation of standards arriving from the safe harbor
provision for the approved codes of practice, and the undefined
interaction between health and safety duties and other
enactments. We have commented on all of these aspects in our
submission, and I've asked Mike to comment today on the overlapping duty
enactments piece as an illustration of the problems with the bill
and to provide what we think may be a solution.
Thanks, Robyn. Members of the committee,
current Section 35 says that in determining whether a
duty imposed under this Act has been complied with, a
person or a court may have regard to the requirements imposed under any
other enactment, whether or not those requirements have a purpose of ensuring
health and safety that apply in these circumstances and that
affect the health and safety of any person.
Compliance with other enactments is relevant to whether or not you've met your
health and safety duty under the current law, but it's for the court to
interpret in the specific circumstances.
The change proposed in Clause 12 is to replace Section
35 with a new clause that said if a person is
subject to a duty by or under this Act to manage a specified
risk and requirements imposed by other enactments in relation to the
same subject matter as the work health and safety duty,
regardless of whether the purpose of the external requirements is to
manage risk to work health and safety.
A person who complies with the requirements of the enactment must be taken to have
complied with the work health and safety duty.
If health and safety regulations also impose one or more specific
duties in relation to that risk, the person must comply
with those duties.
So in our interpretation, if any other enactment covers the same subject
matter as a duty under the Health and Safety at Work Act, regardless of
whether that law is health and safety related,
then HSWA doesn't apply without specific
regulation. We think there are major flaws with this approach.
Enactments are acts, regulations, and other secondary instruments.
There are over 1,000 public acts on the statute books that
aren't the Health and Safety at Work Act and 865 regulations
that are not health and safety regulations, plus hundreds
more in other secondary legislation.
As Simpson Grierson alluded to in their submission to the committee, this creates a
bonanza for defense lawyers acting for clients looking for reasons not
to meet their health and safety at work duties.
Laws that were passed with a specific public or health and safety-related purpose,
but not related directly to worker safety, such as in the
education or health and disability sectors,
or are dramatically outdated, such as the Railways Act of 1961.
The change has the potential to set health and safety in these areas back decades.
There are also laws that don't have an effective regulatory regime associated
with themThe proposed change is not restricted to enactments
related to health and safety. So, for example, the provisions of the Minimum Wage
Act around hours may trump reasonable working hours
regulation related to managing fatigue.
Parliament did not consider workplace safety when passing these other laws,
and the select committee doesn't have any analysis of the potential impact to
inform its consideration of this clause, so the proposal is extremely
worrying as drafted.
We acknowledge that in her opening statement, the minister requested the committee
to pay particular attention to this clause as it's in need of work.
We acknowledge that there are some long-standing issues around the appropriate
boundaries between the Health and Safety at Work Act and other laws, and that there
may be opportunities to clarify both regulatory boundaries
and conflicting requirements. But the analysis to identify
where this may be appropriate simply hasn't been done.
In place of the proposed clause, we've suggested creating an exemption power
exercised by the governor general on advice of the minister following
adequate consultation, where compliance with another specified
enactment may be treated as compliance with the Health and Safety at Work Act,
provided that doing so does not reduce current protections.
And we've suggested what that boundary might look like, uh, in our submission.
Robyn.
Thank you, Mike. This is one illustration of our major concerns that this
bill will not achieve any of its three stated objectives.
We urge the committee to give this bill due consideration, but ultimately
think the risks of proceeding at haste outweigh any potential
benefits, given that workers' lives and limbs are at stake.
We, our members, and other stakeholders stand ready to help, and we're happy to
take questions on any part of our submission.
Thank you, Robyn, um, and Jeff and Mike as well.
Um, can I just say in advance of Jan's question, um, that the 10-minute
hearing, uh, length is very typical for select committees, but
appreciate that you've given us some time for questions today, um, and a really
detailed submission. So a question from Jan.
Um, thank you, and thank you for your submission and for your
presentation. In your submission, you talk about you're estimating
changes that may increase costs to ACC by hundreds of
millions of dollars. How did you arrive at that figure?
Thanks, Jan. Uh,
we... There's a bit of back-of-the-envelope calculation in all this.
We've quoted ACC's comment on the initial cabinet, on the initial cabinet
paper on page six of our submission.
We got that via OIA, and we've extrapolated a bit from that.
So the outstanding claim liability or total cost of claims for injuries suffered
at work is 8.69, uh, billion on the latest figures
and ACC has said that 75% of those costs come from
small PCBUs,
and they've also said that 50% of those costs come from risks that the bill would
treat as non-critical. So we're talking musculoskeletal harms, we're
talking slip, strips, and falls. So if you use a very rough
yardstick and divide 8.69 billion by
75% to factor in the contribution of small PCBUs,
then half that for the non-critical risks, you get a figure of 3 point, uh,
26 billion.
Now, the bill says, as it's currently drafted, that there's no legal requirement to
man- to manage those risks under the carve-out.
If ACC costs go up by only 10% as a, as a result of that,
that's, um, a direct cost of 3.26 million.
And as Robyn says, uh, ACC levies will go up
directly, uh, to employers to, to cover that cost.
Um, we don't know how much-
326 million.
326 million, yes.
Yeah.
Um, we don't know how much these costs will go up, though.
It could be by 10%, it could be by 50%, but the point is that these
sums are really significant and will be passed straight on to employers.
We understand that ACC was excluded from later consultation after
that initial cabinet paper due to the strength of their opposition to these
changes. We would strongly recommend that the committee seeks a more
comprehensive briefing from ACC, uh, that's more refined than
our back-of-the-envelope com- uh, calculations.
Well, thank you for that. I didn't quite expect that level so that's
amazing. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, do I have time for another question?
Uh, yeah, if it can be succinct. Great.
Yeah, um, definitely. I've got... I do have another two, but I'll ask one.
Um, why do you think that the act coming into force the day after royal
assent is too fast?
Uh, the reason that we think it is too fast is it simply does not give
employers time to be able to adjust to the new requirements.
Uh, you know, from a practical point of view, uh, you know, there, there
needs to be a reasonable amount of time to consider what their critical risks are,
to adjust their internal processes, uh, and it just creates
extra complexity and time for them t- that they'll need to be able
to, um, the- meet the new requirements.
So at, we do think it is a bit in haste.
Thank you.
Can I add one more thing onto that, please?
Uh,
alongside the, the lead in time for the employers, there's also the lead in time
for WorkSafe to get good guidance, right?
What we've heard from a lot of other submitters is that WorkSafe needs to develop
good guidance that tells people what to do.
It's possible that this bill is gonna change reasonably significantly on its way to
third reading. That leaves WorkSafe with almost no time to get that guidance
right.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Really helpful. And, and just to reiterate, the, um, depth of
your, um, submission is really helpful to us.
So, um, just note that that, that is appreciated by the
committee. Uh, thank you for your participation in the process.
Lovely. Thank you very much for the time and the opportunity.
No, that's our pleasure, and, uh, have a great rest of your day.
Thank you.
Committee, uh, we have finished our hearings for today.
Uh, in consideration as scheduled for Wednesday